---
title: "Evaluating the effects of burn severity and precipitation on post-fire watershed responses using distributed hydrologic models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-12-09-paper1
excerpt: 'This paper is about modeling the wildfire hydrologic impacts to watersheds using the hydrologic model ATS'
date: 2023-12-09
venue: 'ESS Open Archive'
citation: 'Li, Z., Li, B., Jiang, P., Hammond, G. E., Shuai, P., Coon, E., & Chen, X. (2023). Evaluating the effects of burn severity and precipitation on post-fire watershed responses using distributed hydrologic models. Authorea Preprints. Authorea Preprints. doi: https://doi.org/10.22541/essoar.170224575.51711472/v1'
---

See paper on the publisher's site: [https://doi.org/10.22541/essoar.170224575.51711472/v1](https://doi.org/10.22541/essoar.170224575.51711472/v1)

### Highlights

* The fire-caused soil water repellency is quantified using burn severity products and is incorporated into the integrated hydrologic model.

* High burn severity wildfires cause increased peak flow discharges and decreased infiltration after the first post-fire precipitation event.

* Higher post-fire precipitation events induce larger increase of the peak flow dis- charges due to the soil water repellency effect.


### Abstract

Wildfires can induce an abundance of vegetation and soil changes that may trigger higher surface runoff and soil erosion, affecting the water cycling within these ecosystems. In this study, we employed the Advanced Terrestrial Simulator (ATS), an integrated and fully distributed hydrologic model at watershed scale to investigate post-fire hydrologic responses in a few selected watersheds with varying burn severity in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. The model couples surface overland flow, subsurface flow, and canopy biophysical processes. We developed a new fire module in ATS to account for the fire-caused hydrophobicity in the topsoil. Modeling results show that the watershed-averaged evapotranspiration is reduced after high burn severity wildfires. Post-fire peak flows are increased by 21-34% in the three study watersheds burned with medium to high severity due to the fire-caused soil water repellency (SWR). However, the watershed impacted by a low severity fire only witnessed a 2% surge in post-fire peak flow. Furthermore, the high severity fire resulted in a mean reduction of 38% in the infiltration rate within fire-impacted watershed during the first post-fire wet season. Hypothetical numerical experiments with a range of precipitation regimes after a high severity fire reveal the post-fire peak flows can be escalated by 1-34% due to the SWR effect triggered by the fire. This study implies the importance of applying fully distributed hydrologic models in quantifying the disturbance-feedback loop to account for the complexity brought by spatial heterogeneity.

