---
title: "Integrated Effects of Site Hydrology and Vegetation on Exchange Fluxes and Nutrient Cycling at a Coastal Terrestrial-Aquatic Interface"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-06-01-paper1
excerpt: 'This paper is about modeling the Exchange Fluxes and Nutrient Cycling at a Coastal Terrestrial-Aquatic Interface using the hydrologic model ATS'
date: 2024-06-01
venue: 'Water Resources Research'
citation: 'Li, B., Li, Z., Zheng, J., Jiang, P., Holmquist, J., Regier, P. J., ... & Chen, X. (2024). Integrated effects of site hydrology and vegetation on exchange fluxes and nutrient cycling at a coastal terrestrial‐aquatic interface. Water Resources Research, 60(6), e2023WR035580. doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR035580'
---

See paper on the publisher's site: [https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR035580](https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR035580)

### Highlights

* Tidal elevations, precipitation, and evapotranspiration (ET) interact to control dynamic exchange fluxes across the coastal terrestrial aquatic interface

* Integrated hydrobiogeochemical modeling reveals variability in redox conditions along gradient of upland, transition, and wetland to ocean

* The high uncertainty in microbial-remediated aerobic respiration rate has significant impact on modeling carbon cycling in coastal regions


### Abstract

The complex interactions among soil, vegetation, and site hydrologic conditions driven by precipitation and tidal cycles control the biogeochemical transformations and bi-directional exchange of carbon and nutrients across the terrestrial–aquatic interfaces (TAIs) in coastal regions. This study uses a highly mechanistic model, Advanced Terrestrial Simulator (ATS)-PFLOTRAN, to explore how these interactions affect exchanges of materials and carbon and nitrogen cycling. We used a transect in the Chesapeake Bay region that spans zones of open water, coastal wetland, transition, and upland forest. We designed several simulation scenarios to parse the effects of the individual controlling factors and the sensitivity of carbon cycling to reaction rate parameters derived from laboratory experiments. Our simulations reveal an active zone for carbon cycling under the transition zones between the wetland and the upland. Evapotranspiration is found to enhance the exchange fluxes between the surface and subsurface domains, resulting in a higher dissolved oxygen concentration in the TAIs. The transport of organic carbon derived from plant leaves and roots provide an additional source of organic carbon needed for the aerobic respiration and denitrification processes in the TAIs. The variability in reaction rate parameters associated with microbial activities is also found to play a dominant role in controlling the heterogeneity and dynamics of the simulated redox conditions. This modeling-focused exploratory study enabled us to better understand the complex interactions among soil, water and microbes that govern the hydro-biogeochemical processes at the TAIs, which is an important step toward representing coastal ecosystems in larger-scale Earth system models.
