---
title: "Analytical simulation of meander morphology from equilibrium to long-term evolution: Impacts of channel geometry and vegetation-induced coarsening"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-02-28-paper1
excerpt: 'This paper is about further developing pyRiverBed to evaluate the impacts of channel geometry and vegetation-induced coarsening'
date: 2025-02-28
venue: 'International Journal of Sediment Research'
citation: 'Sun, Y., Song, X., Li, Z., Xu, H., & Bai, Y. (2025). Analytical simulation of meander morphology from equilibrium to long-term evolution: Impacts of channel geometry and vegetation-induced coarsening. International Journal of Sediment Research. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsrc.2025.02.003'
---

See paper on the publisher's site: [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsrc.2025.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsrc.2025.02.003)

### Keywords

* Meander morphodynamics

* Genetic Programming

* Channel geometry

* Vegetation-induced resistance

* River management


### Abstract

This study introduces an innovative approach to modeling meandering river morphology, integrating and investigating the effects of geometric characteristics and vegetation-induced channel coarsening. The developed comprehensive framework combines several advanced techniques: Genetic Programming for refining the scour factor of transverse bed slope, a Leaf Area Index (LAI)-enhanced analytical model for quantifying vegetative flow resistance, and an upstream-weighted moving average method for efficient approximation of the convolution integral in meander migration calculations. The model is validated against both an idealized Kinoshita meander and a natural bend of the Tumen River (China) in equilibrium, demonstrating its robustness across diverse scales and conditions. The model's ability to simulate the long-term evolution, including cutoff events, provides valuable insight for river management strategies. The current findings demonstrate that channel geometry, particularly width-to-depth ratio, plays a dominant role in meander evolution, with wider channels prone to more complex and rapid morphological changes. Vegetation effects are most pronounced in channels with moderate width-to-depth ratios, where they can significantly influence migration rates and bed topography. A combination of channel widening and deepening, coupled with strategic vegetation management, can effectively enhance navigability while maintaining channel stability in the studied Tumen River reach. Sensitivity analyses highlight the complex interplay between hydraulic conditions, sediment characteristics, and vegetation in shaping river morphology. This research advances understanding of the multifaceted nature of meandering river systems and offers practical tools for informed decision-making in river engineering and environmental management, particularly in the context of climate change and increasing anthropogenic pressures on fluvial ecosystems.

